A Tale of Two Tragedies
In June of 1997, Billie Harrell, a shelf stocker at a Home Depot outside of Houston, Texas, won the lottery. The prize was $31 million. Harrell was deeply religious and had struggled his entire life to provide for his wife, Barbara Jean, and his three children. The lottery seemed to be the pay off he and his family finally deserved after a long life of faith and sacrifice.

In July, he arrived in Austin to pick up a check for $1.24 million dollars, the first of 25 checks he would receive over the next 25 years.

Billie bought himself a ranch and horses. He put money away to send his kids to college. He bought homes for members of his family. He donated money to his church. And two years later, in May of 1999, he locked himself in his bedroom, put a shotgun to his chest, and pulled the trigger. A confidant said that Harrell claimed, “Winning the lottery is the worst thing that ever happened to me.”

***

Christopher Reeve was born in 1952 to a wealthy family in New York. Chisel-jawed and good-looking, Reeve split his young adult life between Ivy League schools in the US and sipping wine and riding horses around Europe. An aspiring actor, in 1978, Reeve hit his big break and scored the role of Superman in a big-budget Hollywood movie. He earned millions and became one of the most recognizable celebrities in the world.

Reeve made a fortune. He spent that fortune on nice houses, nice cars, luxurious parties, and his passion for riding horses.

Then in 1995, Reeve fell off a horse and cracked two vertebrae in his spine. He would never walk or breathe on his own again.

Reeve became an advocate for the disabled and spent the rest of his life fundraising for spinal cord research. He was the first celebrity supporter of stem cell research. Reeve later claimed that his accident helped him “appreciate life more.” It wasn’t a joke. He noted that there were “able-bodied people more paralyzed than I am,” and once remarked, “I can laugh. I can love. I am a very lucky guy.”

***

It’s easy to come away from these stories saying, “Yeah, OK, I get it. Money doesn’t buy happiness. So just tell me what does make me happy!” But this, too, misses the point entirely.

Let’s get this out of the way right now: there is no “formula” for being happy.

And by formula, I mean there’s no, “If you do X, Y, and/or Z, then you will be happy.”

For one, psychologists have found that we’re terrible at perceiving our own happiness and estimating what will or will not make us happy.1 On top of that, large-scale, cross-cultural surveys find that despite income gaps, natural disasters, geography, culture, and gender, people self-report more or less the same level of happiness on average everywhere in the world.2 So if natural disasters, culture, gender and income aren’t reliable predictors of our happiness, what is?

Now, there are a few guiding principles we can learn to be happier and stay happier in our everyday lives. That’s what this guide is about: what you can do right now to start improving your overall quality of life. Call it “The Guide to Being Slightly and More Consistently Happier” if you’d like.

So first, we need to get on the same page about what happiness actually is—and perhaps more importantly, what it is not.